Michael Franz: Hey everybody, we're back. I actually didn't move at all from this chair. Since my first lecture, but it's probably been a day or so since maybe you watch the, the first one. Or maybe you're Washington back to back. I don't know.
Michael Franz: But we're now talking about the democratic side of the nomination campaign. And again, a lot of interesting things to consider and to talk about and I am
Michael Franz: I want to get a highlight two things that I think are interesting in these chapters and then hear from you about all of the individual level analysis that they did.
Michael Franz: That they did this time around for the Sanders Clinton campaign.
Michael Franz: The first thing I wanted to talk about and to show you is a little bit about and I put this graph up here in the week three module, just like I did the other stuff.
Michael Franz: Is an interesting analysis that I really have been tracking for a number of years, because I think it's super fun.
Michael Franz: And that is the sort of nomination schedule for the Democratic and Republican parties.
Michael Franz: They released their nomination schedule the year or so in advance of the campaign. Everybody knows when I was going to be New Hampshire is going to be. There's some fighting oftentimes over those dates.
Michael Franz: But the parties have tried to get a good handle on it.
Michael Franz: And there's always a concern that they're going to move the schedule up too fast, that a state is going to try to jump ahead of the line compete with Iowa, New Hampshire, and it's always a big thing, but
Michael Franz: Figure six one and chapter six looks at the delegate count for Clinton and Sanders over the course of the campaign. And it got me thinking.
Michael Franz: That it would be important to show you how the nomination schedule has changed over the years.
Michael Franz: And so I've got these data from a variety of sources and what it does, it doesn't include super delegates, which are sort of free agents for the Democratic Party.
Michael Franz: That can vote at the convention for whoever they like, and they're not determined by the primary or caucus results. There's sort of elected officials who get a sort of seat in the Convention, even though there
Michael Franz: They weren't just because they're elected official. And so, excluding the super delegates each of the states has a caucus or primary were certain delegates are at stake for
Michael Franz: For the Convention and we can count up the cumulative total of delegates that are awarded. It's on State level.
Michael Franz: Across all the states and caucuses in any number of years by looking at when the state's help primaries are caucuses in an election year, and how many delegates. They had to the Convention.
Michael Franz: It's actually not as easy as it sounds. Because getting that information going back in time. It's not super simple and delegate allocation is a very complicated.
Michael Franz: Very complicated thing which does not sit is not so simple as well on election night so and so one the campaign so they get so many delegates is a whole bunch of things that happened after that, which
Michael Franz: You know, if you're interested in, let me know and I can point you in that direction. But, but by and large, if we count the delegate totals.
Michael Franz: And the election days we can get a sense of the sort of cumulative sort of delegates that are at stake in any election year. So 2020
Michael Franz: You know, if you look from the beginning of 2020 and and I didn't make any adjustments for election dates that were postponed because of coven
Michael Franz: I look Joel only at the note nomination schedule as set by the party in 2019 and they made a few adjustments. Move the few things back
Michael Franz: But I didn't make those changes here because I was interested in looking at where the party thought it's calendar would be absent the effective coven
Michael Franz: And so 2020 is in black and you can see they're Super Tuesday and early March, and then there's an accumulation here of delegates kind of throughout March.
Michael Franz: And then we get sort of a little bit of the law in April and then another sort of spate of of states in May, but by and large, you know, if you think of there being around 4000
Michael Franz: pledged delegates that come from primaries and caucuses. And if you assume excluding super delegates sort of a rough calculation that you need about 2000 in order to win the nomination.
Michael Franz: And again, super delegates needs to be factored in. But assuming they don't exist, then we have about half of pledged delegates already sort of out and done by early March.
Michael Franz: And you get another thousand over the course of March and April, but you can see that just in the early period from March to the middle of March, you have this massive jump.
Michael Franz: And then a slow crawl for another thousand and then a slow crawl for the final thousand and
Michael Franz: You know the number of delegates does change from cycle to cycle. So that's why this numbers high here and these numbers are a little lower here, they can add delegates anytime they want to. And so they
Michael Franz: They have over the years. And so this doesn't show the percentage shows the total but can also show you how things have changed over time.
Michael Franz: 2016 is in blue. And you can see that the schedule is pretty similar. A little slower so we don't get to, you know, we get to 2000 at around the same time. And we get to
Michael Franz: 3000 at roughly the same time, but there's a bigger jump here in mid March than there than there was in 2016 and then it's sort of a very, very slow climb to a final jump at the end as opposed to
Michael Franz: You know, a less steep jump at the end and 2020 but the schedule looks pretty good. It's really accelerated over 1976 which took a long time to play out there is no Super Tuesday really in 1976
Michael Franz: And 2000. You can see it looks pretty similar to, but there's a longer pause here in 2000 and there wasn't 2020
Michael Franz: But none of those really compare to 2008 which saw Super Tuesday and early February and we saw the 2000 delegate total
Michael Franz: Achieved by early February and not in mid March. So a whole month earlier this took place. And so the the front loading. That's called front loading and that front loading was sort of
Michael Franz: really troubling to the democrats because it's not something that they really wanted to repeat. And so they push things back in 2016
Michael Franz: And they've kind of preserve that in 2020 although there's been a bit creep earlier again. And so it's this delicate dance between trying to wrap things up early and get to the general election versus letting it play out slower over time.
Michael Franz: The other thing I wanted to share with you is the state level results. So the book talks a lot about individual level attitudes predicting votes for standards or Clinton.
Michael Franz: But we can also look at the results by state which are alluded to in that figure that I mentioned, but that are interesting, also for us to see and I've put those up.
Michael Franz: on Blackboard to inside this module, and I've grabbed these data from a variety of sources. But here's the democratic state level outcome in 2020
Michael Franz: So you can see Biden got over 17 million votes AND SANDERS GOT 9.2 million. And you can see where in fact they did well and where they lost and in
Michael Franz: If you recall, I mean Biden did pretty abysmal and Iowa absolutely awful in New Hampshire.
Michael Franz: Really bad in Nevada. And so in those early weeks there was a member of the, the, the sense that Sanders was ascendant, and who was going to take
Michael Franz: Who's going to take on Sanders from the moderate wing of the party and it all ended up being South Carolina, which determined that
Michael Franz: Sanders Biden was still viable and from there. He just went on a win streak that really, you know, in a few places he lost but he just sort of dominated from there on out.
Michael Franz: And it really started in South Carolina. And so if you're interested in comparing that to 2016 and so I need to zoom in here for us to see
Michael Franz: How it played out in in 2016 you can see Clinton and Sanders here and you can see Clinton loses, New Hampshire, and then she wins.
Michael Franz: North Carolina, and so the Nevada totals are in here because it's it's a caucus. But you can see that that she wins Nevada over here and gets 20 delegates to Sanders.
Michael Franz: But the Iowa totals are not included, and nor is Nevada or any of the caucus states, but in the primaries.
Michael Franz: She wins a very decisive South Carolina and South Carolina becomes important in both of these campaigns and sort of ending the moment early momentum that that Sanders had
Michael Franz: And then you can you can see how she does a throughout. We also have 2008. This is a little different because I didn't store this in quite
Michael Franz: The same way. But you can see these are percentages and you can see in 2008 Iowa goes to Clinton, which, you know, was
Michael Franz: A huge win for him. But then he narrowly loses, New Hampshire, if you remember that narrative and Clinton kind of comes back from that. And then she wins Nevada. And so there's a moment where
Michael Franz: It looks like she might have righted the ship, but then Obama wins South Carolina and
Michael Franz: That changes the tide and so interestingly enough, you see, South Carolina, play a really important role in 2008 2016 and 2020 sometimes to cleanse benefit, sometimes not.
Michael Franz: And you can look at this evolution of the campaign over the states and you can see how well
Michael Franz: Clinton did in both in both 2016 and 2008 and you can you can make all sorts of interesting comparisons across time and that's important to remember as well to see Sanders, where he improved and where he
Michael Franz: Fell off compared to those two campaigns. So those are interesting numbers and you can feel free to dig around those and look at those and find interesting things and
Michael Franz: And I'd be happy to talk about some of those as well. So there's a lot for us to think about lot for us to consider and I'm excited to dig into it with you all next week. And so I'll stop there and I will, I will talk to you soon. Take care.